[paper download](https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/vdy2z/) 

[The transformation of economic analysis at the Federal Reserve during the 1960s.pdf](The transformation of economic analysis at the Federal Reserve during the 1960s.pdf)

# Introduction

#### before1970FedChairNonEconomist => after1970FedChairEconomist => NowBackToNonEconomist

> The 2018 appointment of Jerome Powell, a trained lawyer, as chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is a throwback to a time where non- economists ran the Fed. Up until the early 1970s most of the Board governors and the Regional Bank presidents were not economists but bankers, lawyers, or businessmen: among the first 9 chairmen, 6 were bankers (William Harding, Roy Young, Eugene Meyer, Marriner Eccles, Thomas McCabe, William Martin) and 3 had a background in law (Charles Hamlin, Daniel Crissinger, Eugene Black). Academic credentials were much less valuable than practical experience in the business and banking world, either in the private sector or at the Federal Reserve System. A successful, self-made banker with no college education like Marriner Eccles could become chairman of the Board of Governors. Since the 1960s, however, the number of trained economists serving as Board governors and Regional Bank presidents has increased substantially, and of the last Board chairs—from Arthur Burns (1970-1978) to Janet Yellen (2014- 2018)—only George Miller (1978-1979) had neither a MA nor a PhD in economics.

#### postWar => scientizationCentralBanking => moneyBankingEconomistEnterFed + calculableRulesProceduresReplaceTraditions

> The postwar transformation of the Fed is <u>not restricted to decision-makers</u>. 1 François Claveau and Jeremie Dion (2018) estimate that <u>nearly 50% of money and banking economists listed by the American Economic Association work in the research departments of Regional Banks and the Board</u>; they publish a growing share of academic papers, and these tend to have a greater impact than those published by economists outside central banks (see also Fox 2014, Bordo and Istrefi 2018, Ban 2018). This <u>closer relationship between central banks and academia</u> has been interpreted by historians and sociologists as contributing to a **“scientization” of central banking, a “process by which explicit, abstract, intellectually calculable rules and procedures are increasingly substituted for sentiments, tradition, and rules of thumb**” (Wrong 1970 quoted in Marcussen 2009, 375). Protagonists generally agree that the 1960s were a pivotal moment in the march toward a more modern and technocratic institution (Maisel 1973, Stockwell 1989; Axilrod 2011; Meltzer 2010).2 How this transformation was engineered, by whom, and how it unfolded, however, remain a blind spot of the flourishing literature on central banking.
>
> > 1 The FOMC, who presides over open market policy, <u>consists of the Board of governors, the</u>
> > <u>president of the New York Fed, and four of the eleven presidents of regional banks</u>, who serve on
> > a rotating basis. The board of governors set the discount rate and reserve requirements.
> > Throughout this paper, we will therefore use “Fed” to designate the Federal Reserve System as a
> > “whole” and the Board and the FOMC respectively to designate the two bodies who set monetary
> > policy.

#### previousWorksStudy = CentralBankersNotAsEconomists

> Histories of the Fed span several genres. One, mentioned above, is <u>popular among sociologists, political scientists and international relation specialists</u>. It deals with how central bankers have shaped the postwar <u>social, economic and financial international order</u>, and how the institutional and legal foundations of their operations have been transformed (Ban 2018; Lebaron 2012; Baker et al. 2017; McGregor and Young 2013). In these works, the economic identity of major protagonists matters in that it structures their policy views and agency. Their <u>contribution to economic knowledge is secondary</u>. The <u>focus is not on the models they build and test, or on their controversies, but on how they vote as members of the Federal Open Market Committee</u> (FOMC). <u>Neither are economists qua scientists central in the works of economic historians</u> (Bordo 2008; Feiertag and Margariaz 2016; Monnet 2014). Their objects are the monetary policies implemented by central bankers. Allan Meltzer’s history of Federal Reserve (2003; 2009), despite its detailed discussions and broad coverage, only <u>discusses changes in the tools and practices of economic analysis briefly, as accessories to a</u> story centered mostly on the Fed’s policy actions. <u>Economists are fully restored as monetary model builders in histories of macroeconomics</u> (Hoover 1990, De Vroey 2016; Snowdon and Vane 2005), but that several protagonists were affiliated with central banks <u>stands in the background, if mentioned at all</u>. Two **exceptions** to this separation between institutional and intellectual histories are Conti-Brown (2017) and Mehrling (2010), but these work are **more specific in scope**: they are concerned with the history of the central bank’s independence and dealer of last resort ideas respectively.

#### bioAutoBiographies = greatResourcesEconomistsTaskedFed + extractEconomistModelingWork

> Another popular <u>genre is biographies and autobiographies</u>: Bernanke’s (2015) memoirs is only the last one of a series that includes reminiscences by Maisel (1973), Axilrod (2011), Stockwell (1989). Mallaby’s 2016 prized biopic of Alan Greenspan succeeds Bremner’s 2004 landmark biography of chairman William McChesney Martin. They **provide lively daily accounts of the intellectual climate, the debates and the types of work economists were tasked with at the Fed**, but <u>information on why they were hired in the first place, allowed to research and build models, and challenged has to be extracted and reconstructed from their memories.3</u>
>
> > 3 Maisel (1973) sports a whole chapter on the introduction of formal forecasts at the Fed in the 1960s,
> > but it focuses on the uses rather than the making of economic knowledge.

#### macroEconomicResearch + largeScaleModeling => responseToCriticismDecisionMakingProcess

> In this paper, we build on data on Fed officials, oral history repositories and hitherto under-researched archival sources to unpack the torturous path toward crafting an institutional and intellectual space for postwar developments in theoretical and empirical macroeconomics within the Fed. We show that growing attention to **new macroeconomic research was a reaction to both mounting external criticisms against the Fed’s decision-making process and an oft-described process internal to the discipline whereby institutionalism was displaced by new forms of analysis (Morgan Rutherford 1998)**. We argue that the rise of the number of PhD economists working at the Fed is a symptom rather than a cause of this transformation. Key to our story are **a handful of economists** from the Board of Governor’s Division of Research and Statistics (DRS) who paradoxically did not always held a PhD, but **envisioned their role as going beyond mere data accumulation and got involved into large-scale macroeconometric model building**. We conclude that the divide between PhD and non-PhD economists may not be fully relevant to understand both the shift in the type of economics practiced at the Fed and the uses of this knowledge in the decision making-process. Equally important was the rift between different styles of economic analysis.

# The Fed under pressure

#### williamMartin1951-1970 `=>` independentEconomicPolicy + awayFromPoliticsFinancialCommunity + criticismFromGovFinancialCommunityPress + mostFromAcademicsOnMonetaryEconomics

> William McChesney Martin, chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System between 1951 and 1970, took office in April 1951. A month earlier, as assistant secretary of the Treasury, he had negotiated a landmark agreement between the Treasury and the Fed (Hetzel and Leach 2012). <u>The March 4, 1951 accord officially ended the peg on interest rates</u> that the Fed had maintained since 1942 as part of the war effort, and <u>Martin was therefore eager to reassess the Fed’s newfound ability to pursue independent monetary policy.</u> Throughout his tenure Martin <u>worked to distance the Fed from the political pressures of Washington and to make the Board of Governors the center of the Federal Reserve System—thus reclaiming the spot from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which Martin considered to be too close to the financial community</u> (Meltzer 2009, 55ff). <u>By the end of the 1950s, however the Fed faced mounting criticisms from governmental bodies, the financial community, congress committees, and the press</u>.4 The Council of Economic Advisers sent weekly memos to Kennedy complaining about high interest rates (Cherrier 2018). The Joint Economic Committee of the Congress published a critical 1959 report largely authored by Otto Eckstein, and two more followed in 1960. The Commission on Money and Credit issued a report in 1961, and then launched a series of hearings in 1964.5 The Fed’s policy orientations, as well as the decision process which led to them, were disparaged on a daily basis. **Though sometimes highly political, most of these attacks were also fueled by academic economists who essentially faulted the Fed for not relying on the latest advances in monetary economics**.

## 2.1 Dissatisfaction with policy orientations

#### policyTargetIntrumentCriticism = interestTooHighHurtGrowth + ineffectiveControlLargeCorpExpenditure + tooEffectiveRestrainingSmallBusiness

> A first line of criticisms targeted the Fed’s policy choices. James Knipe, a special consultant to the Board’s chairman, wrote a digest of “the public criticism of the Federal Reserve system” for Martin in 1961.6 He explained that <u>monetary policy was seen as lacking effectiveness in controlling expenditure on capital equipment and business inventories, but was “too effective” in restraining small businesses</u>. In addition, critics considered that <u>the Fed was “stunting national economic growth” by maintaining interest rates too high, and that this was the consequence of the undue influence of private banking interests</u>. These criticisms focused on the choice of targets as well as the choice of instruments.
>
> > 6 Knipe to Martin, “A summary of public criticism of the Federal Reserve System, 1959-1961,”
> > February 9 1962, FRASER

#### centreCriticismOnFedBelief = deviatingFromMonetaryRestraint `=>` EconomyCollapse

> The Council of Economic Advisors formed by John F. Kennedy—Minnesota tax expert Walter Heller, Yale macroeconomist James Tobin, and budget specialist Kermit Gordon—were especially outspoken with regard to mis-specified targets. They flooded the president with memos explaining that “<u>monetary policy has made no significant contribution to economic recovery.” “Short-term rates have been kept from falling to protect our gold stock,” they</u> complained.7 Tobin, whose research stood at the frontier of monetary economics, was even willing to go public. In January of the same year, he published a vocal critic of the Fed in Challenge. <u>He warned about building tensions between the Fed and both the administration and Congress on inflation, growth, and the management of the debt</u>. The essential problem was the price stability fetish at the Fed: “<u>the heavy reliance placed on **monetary restraint** over the past eight years is one of the reasons that, relative to GNP, consumption has grown while investment has fallen</u>,” he explained (Tobin 1961, 26). He also <u>condemned the **Fed’s belief that deviating from monetary restraint would result in a “collapse.”** “[T]he economic logic of this prejudice [was], to say the least, obscure,” he chaffed (ibid).</u>

#### criticismOn = FedRejectPriceStabiizationAchievedByEasierMoneyFiscalPolicy 

#### criticismOn = FedCombinationReserveRequirementOpenMarketOperation `->` debtCostRise  

#### criticismOn = FedFreeReservesIndicatorLiquidity `->` Ineffective 

#### argument = moneySupplyForGrowthLongerTerm

> Tobin did not merely <u>fault the Fed for its narrow economic target,</u> but also <u>for rejecting the idea that price stabilization could be achieved by a combination of easier monetary policy and fiscal restraint</u>. He also denounced the <u>Fed’s neglect of the cost of the debt for the Treasury when choosing the combination of reserve requirements and open market operations</u> used throughout the business cycle (Tobin 1961, 27). In a study commissioned by the House Committee on Banking and Currency, monetarist economists Karl Brunner and Alan Meltzer (1964a,b,c) instead <u>criticized the Fed’s use of free reserves as an indicator of the degree of liquidity of the market and of individual banks, and its failure to distinguish between individual banks and system- wide changes on free reserves</u>. In line with their monetarist leanings, they argued that <u>“[t]he desired growth rate of the money supply should be explicitly chosen for a 6- month or longer period and policy operations should be directed towards achieving that growth rate by explicit choice of a growth rate for the monetary base</u>” (1964c, 84).

## 2.2 Dissatisfaction with the Fed’s policy decision-making process 

#### procedureInadequate = toneFeelMarket vs quantitativeAnalysis

#### timeInadequate = short-termism `->` meeting3weeks + tooManyConfusingVariablesToMonitor

> These economists also criticized <u>how the Fed arrived at its policy decisions</u>. Brunner and Meltzer (1963a, viii) made it clear that it was their main concern: “we believe that there is a more important series of questions that has not been asked very often: **are the procedures for making monetary policy adequate? Does the Federal Reserve have adequate information in sufficient time to make appropriate decisions?**,” Brunner and Meltzer stated at the beginning of their study. First, they found the decision-making process plagued with **short-termism**. The FOMC met every 3 weeks, which was too often and led them to focus too much on short-run phenomena and to **rely on the “tone and feel” of the market rather than serious quantitative analysis**. Second, the FOMC was **monitoring too many variables, reflecting vague and contradictory definitions of concepts** like “credit” and “availability.” Brunner and Meltzer (1964a) identified “a variety of magnitudes or entities reflecting the behavior of banks or the operations on credit markets ... some refer to free reserves, some to short-term rates; others point to reserves, required reserves, ‘credit,’ long-term yields, short-term yields, liquid assets” and concluded that “the very mixed nature of these criteria reveals the absence of a coherent conception” (1964a, 4). 

#### short-termism + lackStructure = lackDirection + caseOnImplementOpenMarketPolicy

> **Short-termism and lack of structure resulted in a lack of direction**, Brunner and Meltzer concluded, echoing other critics. A specific longstanding bone of contention was the content of the directive that the FOMC issued to the manager of the Fed’s Trading Desk—located at the New York Fed—to implement open-market policy. <u>The directive was initially loose, of the “ease or restraint” type. This left a huge discretionary power to the New York Fed</u>, which Martin early on attempted to reduce. How to draft a more specific directive was discussed and re-discussed throughout the 1960s and 1970s. This “indecision” also stemmed from the absence of real debates and confrontation of alternative frameworks. While active and at times “heated” discussions took place during FOMC meetings, these did not necessarily “contribute to the formation of rational monetary policy ... [as a] variety of unsubstantiated judgments and unsupported opinions replaces analysis and evidence as the basis for policy operations,” Brunner and Meltzer (1964c, 92) bemoaned. Their suggestion for reform was consequently radical: “serious consideration should be given to replacing the FOMC with a single administrative official,” they wrote (p93).

#### FedLackTransparency = lackCommunicationToEconomicMonetaryCommission + irresponsibleUseOfFedIndependence

> Another line of criticism was the **Fed’s lack of transparency**. Both the Joint Economic Committee and the Monetary Commission complained that the <u>lack of communication on the reasons for major policy decision and actions</u> on the Fed’s policies resulted in “a tendency to seize upon even the most outlandish rumors as significant” (Knipe 1962, 40). There was however, a more fundamental attack behind the demand for transparency. The key issue, elicited by Tobin (1961, 24) in his Challenge article, was **how the board had used its freedom since 1951**. The independence of the Fed had become a “heated issue, a symbol of <u>irresponsible power to some, and to others the last citadel protecting the dollar and the country from disaster</u>,” he warned.

#### IndependenceChallenged = suggestChairCEAOrSecretaryTreasurySitOnBoard

> Thwarting this newfound independence was precisely the agenda of the chairman of the Commission on Money and Credit, Texas congressman Wright Patman. Dubbed “the populist scourge of the Fed,” he was a staunch opponent of high interest rates and of the separation of monetary and fiscal policy, which he constantly challenged after 1951 (Conti-Brown 2017, 274-276; see also Young 2000, ch. 7, 8). In 1964, he proposed to hold four-month hearings for the 50th birthday of the Federal Reserve Act, hoping that the <u>Congress would eventually agree to get rid of the FOMC, reduce the budgetary autonomy of the Fed, and restore the primacy of the Treasury over the definition of monetary policy.</u> Johnson’s intervention, at Martin’s request, thwarted Patman’s plans, but the criticisms outlined in the Brunner-Meltzer report emanating from the commission would have a lasting influence. Again, the report echoed the 1959 diagnosis of the Joint Economic Committee: monetary and fiscal policy should be better coordinated, under the oversight of the executive or the Congress (Knipe 1962, 32). It was **suggested that either the chairman of CEA or the Secretary of the Treasury sit on the Board of Governors**.

